the OPTIONAL MATCH behaves similarly to MATCH because there are nodes in the graph. However, if you run the same query on an empty graph (without any nodes or relationships), the OPTIONAL MATCH would still return an empty result without raising an error. This makes OPTIONAL MATCH useful in scenarios where you want to retrieve data if it exists but continue the query gracefully if the data is missing.

---------

The example you provided uses both MATCH and OPTIONAL MATCH to find patterns in the graph. Let's break down the query step by step:

MATCH (n:QueueAlias {name: 'A/B', qmgr: "CMN30", env: "TEST"})

In this part of the query, we use MATCH to find a node labeled as "QueueAlias" with the properties name: 'A/B', qmgr: "CMN30", and env: "TEST". This part will return the node n that matches these specific properties.

OPTIONAL MATCH (n) - [r:TARGETS|USED_BY|AuthFor*] - (m)


In this part of the query, we use OPTIONAL MATCH to find patterns between the previously matched node n and another node labeled as "m," connected through relationships labeled as TARGETS, USED_BY, or AuthFor. The * after the relationship type indicates a variable-length relationship, allowing multiple relationship hops.

The OPTIONAL MATCH clause is used here to indicate that we want to find the patterns if they exist but continue the query even if no matching patterns are found. If no patterns are found, the result will show null for r and m.

RETURN n, r, m

Finally, the RETURN clause is used to display the results of the previous MATCH and OPTIONAL MATCH clauses. It returns the n node, the r relationship (if it exists), and the m node (if it exists) that were found in the graph.

To summarize, the provided Cypher query finds a node with specific properties using MATCH, and then uses OPTIONAL MATCH to find patterns between this node and other nodes connected by certain types of relationships. The query will return all matches found, including null for r and m if no matching relationships or nodes are found in the graph.


-------------